README.md, before:

# Eloquent Filter

[![Latest Stable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter/v/stable)](https://packagist.org/packages/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter)
[![Total Downloads](https://poser.pugx.org/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter/downloads)](https://packagist.org/packages/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter)
[![License](https://poser.pugx.org/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter/license)](https://packagist.org/packages/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter)
[![StyleCI](https://styleci.io/repos/53163405/shield)](https://styleci.io/repos/53163405/)

An Eloquent way to filter Eloquent Models

## Introduction
Lets say we want to return a list of users filtered by multiple parameters. When we navigate to:

`/users?name=er&last_name=&company_id=2&roles[]=1&roles[]=4&roles[]=7&industry=5`

`$request->all()` will return:
```php
[
	'name' 		 => 'er',
    'last_name'  => ''
    'company_id' => '2',
    'roles'      => ['1','4','7'],
    'industry'   => '5'
]
```
To filter by all those parameters we would need to do something like:
```php
<?php namespace App\Http\Controllers;

use Illuminate\Http\Request;

use App\Http\Requests;
use App\User;

class UserController extends Controller
{

    public function index(Request $request)
    {
    	$query = User::where('company_id', $request->input('company_id'));

        if ($request->has('last_name'))
        {
            $query->where('last_name', 'LIKE', '%' . $request->input('last_name') . '%');
        }

        if ($request->has('name'))
        {
            $query->where(function ($q) use ($request)
            {
                return $q->where('first_name', 'LIKE', $request->input('name') . '%')
                    ->orWhere('last_name', 'LIKE', '%' . $request->input('name') . '%');
            });
        }

        $query->whereHas('roles', function ($q) use ($request)
        {
            return $q->whereIn('id', $request->input('roles'));
        })
            ->whereHas('clients', function ($q) use ($request)
            {
                return $q->whereHas('industry_id', $request->input('industry'));
            });

        return $query->get();
    }

}
```
To filter that same input With Eloquent Filters:

```php
<?php namespace App\Http\Controllers;

use Illuminate\Http\Request;

use App\Http\Requests;
use App\User;

class UserController extends Controller
{

	public function index(Request $request)
    {
    	return User::filter($request->all())->get();
    }

}
```

## Configuration
### Install Through Composer
```
composer require tucker-eric/eloquentfilter
```
#### Define the default model filter

Create a public method `modelFilter()` that returns `$this->provideFilter(Your\Model\Filter::class);` in your model.

> Not definining a filter in your model will default the filter to `App\ModelFilters\{Model}Filter`. For example, in our user model the `filter()` method will use the `App\ModelFilters\UserFilter` if not otherwise defined.  `App\ModelFilters` namespace is used if there is no configuration file.

```php
<?php namespace App;

use EloqentFilter\Filterable;
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Model;

class User extends Model
{
    use Filterable;

    public function modelFilter()
    {
    	return $this->provideFilter(App\ModelFilters\CustomFilters\CustomUserFilter::class);
    }

    //User Class
}
```

#### With Configuration File (Optional)
> Registering the service provider will give you access to the `php artisan model:filter {model}` command as well as allow you to publish the configuration file.  Registering the service provider is not required as long as you have a `modelFilter()` method on all models using the `EloquentFilter\Filterable` trait OR all your model filters reside in the `App\ModelFilters` namespace and follow the naming convention of `{Model}Filter`

After installing the Eloquent Filter library, register the `EloquentFilter\ServiceProvider::class` in your `config/app.php` configuration file:
```php
'providers' => [
    // Other service providers...

    EloquentFilter\ServiceProvider::class,
],
```
Copy the package config to your local config with the publish command:
```bash
php artisan vendor:publish --provider="EloquentFilter\ServiceProvider"
```
In the `app/eloquentfilter.php` config file.  Set the namespace your model filters will reside in:
```php
'namespace' => "App\\ModelFilters\\",
```

#### Generating The Filter
> Only available if you have registered `EloquentFilter\ServiceProvider::class` in the providers array in your `config/app.php'

You can create a model filter with the following artisan command:
```bash
php artisan model:filter User
```
Where `User` is the Eloquent Model you are creating the filter for.  This will create `app/ModelFilters/UserFilter.php`


## Usage

### Defining The Filter Logic
Define the filter logic based on the camel cased input key passed to the `filter()` method.

- Empty strings are ignored
- `setup()` will be called regardless of input
- `_id` is dropped from the end of the input to define the method so filtering `user_id` would use the `user()` method
- Input without a corresponding filter method are ignored
- The value of the key is injected into the method
- All values are accessible through the `$this->input()` method or a single value by key `$this->input($key)`
- All Eloquent Builder methods are accessible in `this` context in the model filter class.

To define methods for the following input:
```php
[
	'company_id'   => 5,
	'name'         => 'Tuck',
	'mobile_phone' => '888555'
]
```
You would use the following methods:
```php
class UserFilter extends ModelFilter
{
	// This will filter 'company_id' OR 'company'
    public function company($id)
    {
        return $this->where('company_id', $id);
    }

    public function name($name)
    {
        return $this->where(function($q) use ($name)
        {
            return $q->where('first_name', 'LIKE', "%$name%")
                ->orWhere('last_name', 'LIKE', "%$name%");
        });
    }

    public function mobilePhone($phone)
    {
        return $this->where('mobile_phone', 'LIKE', "$phone%");
    }

	public function setup()
    {
        $this->onlyShowDeletedForAdmins();
    }

    public function onlyShowDeletedForAdmins()
    {
        if(Auth::user()->isAdmin())
        {
            $this->withTrashed();
        }
    }
}
```
> Note:  In the above example if you do not want `_id` dropped from the end of the input you can set `protected $drop_id = false` on your filter class.  Doing this would allow you to have a `company()` filter method as well as a `companyId()` filter method.

> Note: In the example above all methods inside `setup()` will be called every time `filter()` is called on the model

### Applying The Filter To A Model

Implement the `EloquentFilter\Filterable` trait on any Eloquent model:
```php
<?php namespace App;

use EloqentFilter\Filterable;
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Model;

class User extends Model
{
    use Filterable;

    //User Class
}
```
This gives you access to the `filter()` method that accepts an array of input:
```php
class UserController extends Controller
{
	public function index(Request $request)
    {
        return User::filter($request->all())->get();
    }
}
```
#### Filtering By Relationships
In order to filter by a relationship (whether the relation is joined in the query or not) add the relation in the `$relations` array with the name of the relation as referred to on the model as the key and the column names that will be received as input to filter.

The related model **MUST** have a ModelFilter associated with it.  We instantiate the related model's filter and use the column values from the `$relations` array to call the associated methods.

This is helpful when querying multiple columns on a relation's table.  For a single column using a `$this->whereHas()` method in the model filter works just fine

##### Example:

If I have a `User` that `hasMany` `App\Client::class` my model would look like:
```php
class User extends Model
{
    use Filterable;

    public function clients()
    {
    	return $this->hasMany(Client::class);
    }
}
```
Let's also say each `App\Client` has belongs to `App\Industry::class`:
```php
class Client extends Model
{
    use Filterable;

    public function industry()
    {
    	return $this->belongsTo(Industry::class);
    }
}
```
We want to query our User's and filter them based on the industry of their client:

Input used to filter:
```php
$input = [
	'industry' => '5'
];
```
`UserFilter` with the relation defined so it's able to be queried.
```php
class UserFilter extends ModelFilter
{
	public $relations = [
        'clients' => ['industry'],
    ];
}
```
`ClientFilter` with the `industry` method that's used to filter:
```php
class ClientFilter extends ModelFilter
{
	public $relations = [];

    public function industry($id)
    {
    	return $this->where('industry_id', $id);
	}
}
```

If the following array is passed to the `filter()` method:
```php
[
	'name' 		 => 'er',
    'last_name'  => ''
    'company_id' => 2,
    'roles'      => [1,4,7],
    'industry'   => 5
]
```
In `app/ModelFilters/UserFilter.php`:
```php
<?php namespace App\ModelFilters;

use EloquentFilter\ModelFilter;

class UserFilter extends ModelFilter
{
	public $relations = [
        'clients' => ['industry'],
    ];

	public function name($name)
    {
    	return $this->where(function($q)
        {
        	return $q->where('first_name', 'LIKE', $name . '%')->orWhere('last_name', 'LIKE', '%' . $name.'%');
        });
    }

    public function lastName($lastName)
    {
    	return $this->where('last_name', 'LIKE', '%' . $lastName);
    }

    public function company($id)
    {
    	return $this->where('company_id',$id);
    }

    public function roles($ids)
    {
    	return $this->whereHas('roles', function($query) use ($ids)
        {
        	return $query->whereIn('id', $ids);
        });
    }
}
```
#### Pagination
If you want to paginate your query and keep the url query string without having to use:
```php
{!! $pages->appends(Input::except('page'))->render() !!}
```
The `paginateFilter()` and `simplePaginateFilter()` methods accept the same input as [Laravel's paginator](https://laravel.com/docs/master/pagination#basic-usage) and returns the respective paginator.
```php
class UserController extends Controller
{
	public function index(Request $request)
    {
        $users = User::filter($request->all())->paginateFilter();

        return view('users.index', compact('users'));
    }
```
OR:
```php
    public function simpleIndex(Request $request)
    {
        $users = User::filter($request->all())->paginateSimpleFilter();

        return view('users.index', compact('users'));
    }
}
```
In your view `$users->render()` will return pagination links as it normally would but with the original query string with empty input ignored.

#### Dynamic Filters
Sometimes you need a dynamic way to change filters on a model or maybe use multiple filters on a model.  To define a dynamic filter just pass the filter as the second parameter of the `filter()` method:

```php
<?php

namespace App\Http\Controllers;

use Illuminate\Http\Request;

use App\Http\Requests;
use App\User;
use App\ModelFilters\Admin\UserFilter as AdminFilter;
use App\ModelFilters\User\UserFilter as BasicUserFilter;
use Auth;

class UserController extends Controller
{
	public function index(Request $request)
    {
    	$userFilter = Auth::user()->isAdmin() ? AdminFilter::class : BasicUserFilter::class;

        return User::filter($request->all(), $userFilter)->get();
    }
}

```


# Contributing
Any contributions welcome!

Commit message:

update README with artisan command namespacing

README.md, after:

# Eloquent Filter

[![Latest Stable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter/v/stable)](https://packagist.org/packages/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter)
[![Total Downloads](https://poser.pugx.org/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter/downloads)](https://packagist.org/packages/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter)
[![License](https://poser.pugx.org/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter/license)](https://packagist.org/packages/tucker-eric/eloquentfilter)
[![StyleCI](https://styleci.io/repos/53163405/shield)](https://styleci.io/repos/53163405/)

An Eloquent way to filter Eloquent Models

## Introduction
Lets say we want to return a list of users filtered by multiple parameters. When we navigate to:

`/users?name=er&last_name=&company_id=2&roles[]=1&roles[]=4&roles[]=7&industry=5`

`$request->all()` will return:
```php
[
	'name' 		 => 'er',
    'last_name'  => ''
    'company_id' => '2',
    'roles'      => ['1','4','7'],
    'industry'   => '5'
]
```
To filter by all those parameters we would need to do something like:
```php
<?php namespace App\Http\Controllers;

use Illuminate\Http\Request;

use App\Http\Requests;
use App\User;

class UserController extends Controller
{

    public function index(Request $request)
    {
    	$query = User::where('company_id', $request->input('company_id'));

        if ($request->has('last_name'))
        {
            $query->where('last_name', 'LIKE', '%' . $request->input('last_name') . '%');
        }

        if ($request->has('name'))
        {
            $query->where(function ($q) use ($request)
            {
                return $q->where('first_name', 'LIKE', $request->input('name') . '%')
                    ->orWhere('last_name', 'LIKE', '%' . $request->input('name') . '%');
            });
        }

        $query->whereHas('roles', function ($q) use ($request)
        {
            return $q->whereIn('id', $request->input('roles'));
        })
            ->whereHas('clients', function ($q) use ($request)
            {
                return $q->whereHas('industry_id', $request->input('industry'));
            });

        return $query->get();
    }

}
```
To filter that same input With Eloquent Filters:

```php
<?php namespace App\Http\Controllers;

use Illuminate\Http\Request;

use App\Http\Requests;
use App\User;

class UserController extends Controller
{

	public function index(Request $request)
    {
    	return User::filter($request->all())->get();
    }

}
```

## Configuration
### Install Through Composer
```
composer require tucker-eric/eloquentfilter
```
#### Define the default model filter

Create a public method `modelFilter()` that returns `$this->provideFilter(Your\Model\Filter::class);` in your model.

> Not definining a filter in your model will default the filter to `App\ModelFilters\{Model}Filter`. For example, in our user model the `filter()` method will use the `App\ModelFilters\UserFilter` if not otherwise defined.  `App\ModelFilters` namespace is used if there is no configuration file.

```php
<?php namespace App;

use EloqentFilter\Filterable;
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Model;

class User extends Model
{
    use Filterable;

    public function modelFilter()
    {
    	return $this->provideFilter(App\ModelFilters\CustomFilters\CustomUserFilter::class);
    }

    //User Class
}
```

#### With Configuration File (Optional)
> Registering the service provider will give you access to the `php artisan model:filter {model}` command as well as allow you to publish the configuration file.  Registering the service provider is not required as long as you have a `modelFilter()` method on all models using the `EloquentFilter\Filterable` trait OR all your model filters reside in the `App\ModelFilters` namespace and follow the naming convention of `{Model}Filter`

After installing the Eloquent Filter library, register the `EloquentFilter\ServiceProvider::class` in your `config/app.php` configuration file:
```php
'providers' => [
    // Other service providers...

    EloquentFilter\ServiceProvider::class,
],
```
Copy the package config to your local config with the publish command:
```bash
php artisan vendor:publish --provider="EloquentFilter\ServiceProvider"
```
In the `app/eloquentfilter.php` config file.  Set the namespace your model filters will reside in:
```php
'namespace' => "App\\ModelFilters\\",
```

#### Generating The Filter
> Only available if you have registered `EloquentFilter\ServiceProvider::class` in the providers array in your `config/app.php'

You can create a model filter with the following artisan command:
```bash
php artisan model:filter User
```
Where `User` is the Eloquent Model you are creating the filter for.  This will create `app/ModelFilters/UserFilter.php`

The command also supports psr-4 namespacing for creating filters.  You just need to make sure you escape the backslashes in the class name.  For example:
```bash
php artisan model:filter AdminFilters\\User
```
This would create `app/ModelFilters/AdminFilters/UserFilter.php`

## Usage

### Defining The Filter Logic
Define the filter logic based on the camel cased input key passed to the `filter()` method.

- Empty strings are ignored
- `setup()` will be called regardless of input
- `_id` is dropped from the end of the input to define the method so filtering `user_id` would use the `user()` method
- Input without a corresponding filter method are ignored
- The value of the key is injected into the method
- All values are accessible through the `$this->input()` method or a single value by key `$this->input($key)`
- All Eloquent Builder methods are accessible in `this` context in the model filter class.

To define methods for the following input:
```php
[
	'company_id'   => 5,
	'name'         => 'Tuck',
	'mobile_phone' => '888555'
]
```
You would use the following methods:
```php
class UserFilter extends ModelFilter
{
	// This will filter 'company_id' OR 'company'
    public function company($id)
    {
        return $this->where('company_id', $id);
    }

    public function name($name)
    {
        return $this->where(function($q) use ($name)
        {
            return $q->where('first_name', 'LIKE', "%$name%")
                ->orWhere('last_name', 'LIKE', "%$name%");
        });
    }

    public function mobilePhone($phone)
    {
        return $this->where('mobile_phone', 'LIKE', "$phone%");
    }

	public function setup()
    {
        $this->onlyShowDeletedForAdmins();
    }

    public function onlyShowDeletedForAdmins()
    {
        if(Auth::user()->isAdmin())
        {
            $this->withTrashed();
        }
    }
}
```
> Note:  In the above example if you do not want `_id` dropped from the end of the input you can set `protected $drop_id = false` on your filter class.  Doing this would allow you to have a `company()` filter method as well as a `companyId()` filter method.

> Note: In the example above all methods inside `setup()` will be called every time `filter()` is called on the model

### Applying The Filter To A Model

Implement the `EloquentFilter\Filterable` trait on any Eloquent model:
```php
<?php namespace App;

use EloqentFilter\Filterable;
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\Model;

class User extends Model
{
    use Filterable;

    //User Class
}
```
This gives you access to the `filter()` method that accepts an array of input:
```php
class UserController extends Controller
{
	public function index(Request $request)
    {
        return User::filter($request->all())->get();
    }
}
```
#### Filtering By Relationships
In order to filter by a relationship (whether the relation is joined in the query or not) add the relation in the `$relations` array with the name of the relation as referred to on the model as the key and the column names that will be received as input to filter.

The related model **MUST** have a ModelFilter associated with it.  We instantiate the related model's filter and use the column values from the `$relations` array to call the associated methods.

This is helpful when querying multiple columns on a relation's table.  For a single column using a `$this->whereHas()` method in the model filter works just fine

##### Example:

If I have a `User` that `hasMany` `App\Client::class` my model would look like:
```php
class User extends Model
{
    use Filterable;

    public function clients()
    {
    	return $this->hasMany(Client::class);
    }
}
```
Let's also say each `App\Client` has belongs to `App\Industry::class`:
```php
class Client extends Model
{
    use Filterable;

    public function industry()
    {
    	return $this->belongsTo(Industry::class);
    }
}
```
We want to query our User's and filter them based on the industry of their client:

Input used to filter:
```php
$input = [
	'industry' => '5'
];
```
`UserFilter` with the relation defined so it's able to be queried.
```php
class UserFilter extends ModelFilter
{
	public $relations = [
        'clients' => ['industry'],
    ];
}
```
`ClientFilter` with the `industry` method that's used to filter:
```php
class ClientFilter extends ModelFilter
{
	public $relations = [];

    public function industry($id)
    {
    	return $this->where('industry_id', $id);
	}
}
```

If the following array is passed to the `filter()` method:
```php
[
	'name' 		 => 'er',
    'last_name'  => ''
    'company_id' => 2,
    'roles'      => [1,4,7],
    'industry'   => 5
]
```
In `app/ModelFilters/UserFilter.php`:
```php
<?php namespace App\ModelFilters;

use EloquentFilter\ModelFilter;

class UserFilter extends ModelFilter
{
	public $relations = [
        'clients' => ['industry'],
    ];

	public function name($name)
    {
    	return $this->where(function($q)
        {
        	return $q->where('first_name', 'LIKE', $name . '%')->orWhere('last_name', 'LIKE', '%' . $name.'%');
        });
    }

    public function lastName($lastName)
    {
    	return $this->where('last_name', 'LIKE', '%' . $lastName);
    }

    public function company($id)
    {
    	return $this->where('company_id',$id);
    }

    public function roles($ids)
    {
    	return $this->whereHas('roles', function($query) use ($ids)
        {
        	return $query->whereIn('id', $ids);
        });
    }
}
```
#### Pagination
If you want to paginate your query and keep the url query string without having to use:
```php
{!! $pages->appends(Input::except('page'))->render() !!}
```
The `paginateFilter()` and `simplePaginateFilter()` methods accept the same input as [Laravel's paginator](https://laravel.com/docs/master/pagination#basic-usage) and returns the respective paginator.
```php
class UserController extends Controller
{
	public function index(Request $request)
    {
        $users = User::filter($request->all())->paginateFilter();

        return view('users.index', compact('users'));
    }
```
OR:
```php
    public function simpleIndex(Request $request)
    {
        $users = User::filter($request->all())->paginateSimpleFilter();

        return view('users.index', compact('users'));
    }
}
```
In your view `$users->render()` will return pagination links as it normally would but with the original query string with empty input ignored.

#### Dynamic Filters
Sometimes you need a dynamic way to change filters on a model or maybe use multiple filters on a model.  To define a dynamic filter just pass the filter as the second parameter of the `filter()` method:

```php
<?php

namespace App\Http\Controllers;

use Illuminate\Http\Request;

use App\Http\Requests;
use App\User;
use App\ModelFilters\Admin\UserFilter as AdminFilter;
use App\ModelFilters\User\UserFilter as BasicUserFilter;
use Auth;

class UserController extends Controller
{
	public function index(Request $request)
    {
    	$userFilter = Auth::user()->isAdmin() ? AdminFilter::class : BasicUserFilter::class;

        return User::filter($request->all(), $userFilter)->get();
    }
}

```


# Contributing
Any contributions welcome!
